Offline install feature spec (#102)
radius-project/design-notes: features/2025-07-10-offline-install-feature-spec.md

| 1a   | `rad` CLI binary                                             | [install.sh](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/radius-project/radius/main/deploy/install.sh) script | No change                                                    | Enhanced `install.sh`                                  |
| 1b   | `rad-bicep` binary                                           | `rad bicep download`                                         | Installed by `install.sh`                                    | Installed by `install.sh`                              |
| 1c   | `bicepconfig.json`                                           | `rad init`                                                   | Created by to `install.sh`                                   | Created by to `install.sh`                             |
| 2    | [Radius Helm chart](https://github.com/project-radius/radius/tree/main/deploy/Chart) | `rad init`, `rad install` or `helm repo add radius`          | No change                                                    | Chart manually pulled                                  |

> | 3    | Radius container images (  `ucpd`, `controller`, `applications-rp`, `dynamic-rp`, `bicep`, `dashboard`) | Downloaded via the Radius Helm chart from GHCR               | No change                                                    | Manually imported into the user's private OCI registry |

Reviewer: We have a new container as of 0.50: pre-upgrade. Link: https://github.com/radius-project/radius/pkgs/container/pre-upgrade.

```bash
$ helm pull https://github.com/radius-project/radius/tree/main/deploy/Chart
$ helm repo add nexus http://<nexus_hostname>/repository/<nexus_repository_name>/ 
$ helm cm-push radius nexus
```

If the organization does not have a Helm chart repository mirror, the platform engineer or security engineer can download the Radius chart.

```bash
$ helm pull https://github.com/radius-project/radius/tree/main/deploy/Chart
```

**Container images**

The platform engineer or security engineer imports the Radius container images (`ucpd`, `controller`, `applications-rp`, `dynamic-rp`, `bicep`, `dashboard`) into their OCI registry. 

**Radius and AWS Bicep extensions**

The platform engineer or security engineer imports the Radius Bicep extensions into their OCI registry. 

### User Story 2 – Install CLI

***As a platform engineer or developer, I need to install the Radius CLI using pre-downloaded binaries***

The platform engineer or developer runs the installation script with additional parameters.

```bash
$ install.sh \
  --version <radius_version>
  --binary-install-source <path_to_rad_and_rad_bicep_cli> \

>   --bicep-extension-oci-registry <oci_registry_url>/<repository>

Reviewer 2: Currently bicep only supports ACR, they should be able to specify a URL to something like nexus to download via http get.

* Today, the `bicepconfig.json` file is created by `rad init`. This is problematic since offline installs will not use `rad init`. Also, the contents of `bicepconfig.json` file created by `rad init` is hard-coded. With this change, the `install.sh` script will create the `bicepconfig.json` file based on user input (`--bicep-extension-oci-registry`).

### User Story 3 – Install Radius via CLI

***As a platform engineer, I need to install Radius offline using the Radius CLI***

The platform engineer installs Radius using the CLI specifying the private OCI registry and to skip installing Contour.

```bash
rad install kubernetes \
  --set global.imageRegistry=<oci_registry_url>
  --set global.imageTag=<image_tag>
  --set global.imagePullSecrets=<kubernetes_secret_name>
  --skip-contour-install
```

> [!NOTE]
>
>  `rad init` is out of scope for offline installations. We expect `rad init` to continue to be optimized for the quick start scenario. 

The `global.imageRegistry` is the private OCI registry where the Radius container images were stored in the previous step.

The `global.imageTag` is the tag of the container images to optionally be used.

> The `global.imagePullSecrets` is the name of the Kubernetes secret of type docker-registry to be used to pull the container images (the secret is created beforehand).

Reviewer: This is an array: https://github.com/radius-project/radius/blob/main/pkg/cli/cmd/install/kubernetes/kubernetes.go#L76.

### Goals

* Enable platform engineers to install and upgrade Radius while not connected to the internet
* Enable platform engineers to control what versions of all require software components are installed
* Specifically, improve the way Terraform is installed, configured, and upgraded
* Increase the transparency of what software is required to run Radius

### Non-Goals (out of scope)

* Enhancing the installation experience in other ways

## Inventory of software components

Radius makes the assumption that the installation environment has full access to the internet and installs many software components on behalf of the user. Below is an inventory:

| #    | Component                                                    | As-Is Distribution                                           | To-Be Online Distribution                                    | To-Be Offline Distribution                             |
| ---- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------ |

> | 1a   | `rad` CLI binary                                             | [install.sh](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/radius-project/radius/main/deploy/install.sh) script | No change                                                    | Manually installed                                     |

Author: This incorrectly says manually installed. I proposed below enhancing install.sh to do an offline install. Will update the to-be offline distribution column.

> | 1b   | `rad-bicep` binary                                           | [install.sh](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/radius-project/radius/main/deploy/install.sh) script | No change                                                    | Manually installed                                     |

Reviewer 3: I think this is just the bicep binary, i.e. https://github.com/Azure/bicep/releases/

The platform engineer or security engineer imports `install.sh`, `rad`, and `rad-bicep` into their software mirror (for example, Sonatype Nexus Repository mirror) or other file storage location.

**Helm chart**

If the organization has a Helm chart repository mirror such as Sonatype Nexus, the platform engineer or security engineer can load the Radius chart into the mirror using something similar to:

```bash
$ helm pull https://github.com/radius-project/radius/tree/main/deploy/Chart
$ helm repo add nexus http://<NEXUS_HOSTNAME>/repository/<NEXUS_REPOSITORY_NAME>/ 
$ helm cm-push radius nexus
```

If the organization does not have a Helm chart repository mirror, the platform engineer or security engineer can download the Radius chart.

```bash
$ helm pull https://github.com/radius-project/radius/tree/main/deploy/Chart
```

**Container images**

The platform engineer or security engineer imports the Radius container images into their OCI registry. For example, an enterprise who uses Azure Container Registry may import the images using a command similar to:

> 

Reviewer 2: we could make import.sh

### User Story 3 – Install Radius via CLI

***As a platform engineer, I need to install Radius offline using the Radius CLI***

The platform engineer installs Radius using the CLI specifying the private OCI registry and to skip installing Contour.

```bash
rad install kubernetes \
  --set image.repository=<OCI_REGISTRY_URL>/<REPOSITORY>
  --skip-contour-install
```

> [!NOTE]
>
>  `rad init` will not support offline installations.

The `image.repository` is the private OCI registry where the Radius container images were stored in the previous step.

The `--skip-contour-install` does not install Contour. Therefore the Gateway resource types will not function until extensibility is implemented.

> [!CAUTION]
>
> `--skip-contour-install` is expected to be removed from Radius in the near future as part of the compute extensibility work. The design for the Gateway recipe no longer uses Contour and Contour is no longer installed by default.

> If a Helm mirror has not been configured via `helm repo add`, the `--chart` argument can be used.

Reviewer: Talking about the chart location here.

```bash
rad install kubernetes \
  --chart <PATH_TO_RADIUS_HELM_CHART_FROM_HELM_PULL> \
  ...
```

### User Story 4 – Install Radius via Helm

***As a platform engineer, I need to install Radius using Helm***

The platform engineer installs Radius using Helm with similar settings.

```bash
helm upgrade radius radius/radius \
  --install \
  --create-namespace 
  --namespace radius-system \
  --version 0.48.0 \
  --wait --timeout 15m0s \
  --set image.repository=<OCI_REGISTRY_URL>/<REPOSITORY>
```

## Scenario 2 – Managing Terraform

### User Story 5 – Install Terraform

> ***As a platform engineer, I need to install and configure Terraform for Radius to use***

Reviewer 3: Should we expand the concept to include additional recipe engines?

**`terraform.bicep`**

```yaml
param token string

resource tf 'System.Resources/terraform@2025-08-01-preview' = {
  name: 'tf'
  terraformCLI: {
    url: 'https://<TF_MIRROR_URL>/terraform_1.5.7_linux_amd64.zip'
    checksum: 'sha256:37f2d497ea512324d59b50ebf1b58a6fcc2a2828d638a4f6fdb1f41af00140f3'
  }
  terraformrc: {
    provider_installation: {
      network_mirror: {
        path: 'https://<TF_MIRROR_URL>/'
        include: ["*"]
      }
      direct: {
        exclude: ["azurerm"]
      }
    }
    // Equivilent to recipeConfig.authentication on Environments today
    credentials: {
      <TF_MIRROR_URL>: {
        secret: providerSecret.id
      }
    }
    // Environment variables injected into the Terraform process
    // Equivilent to recipeConfig.env on Environments today
    env: {
      TF_REGISTRY_CLIENT_TIMEOUT: 15
    }
  }
}

resource providerSecret 'Applications.Core/secretStores@2023-10-01-preview' = {
  name: 'providerSecret'
  properties: {
    type: 'generic'
    data: {
      token: {
        value: token
      }
    }
  }
}
```

The Terraform resource intentionally does not include these terraformrc properties:

> * `credentials_helper`

Reviewer 2: Do you have some reasoning? just wondering if that would prevent this from working in an environment where they use that.

* `provider_installation.filesystem_mirror`
* `disable_checkpoint`
* `disable_checkpoint_signature`
* `plugin_cache_dir`

The platform engineer deploys the Terraform resource.

````bash

> $ rad deploy terraform.bicep

Reviewer 3: I realize that this is using the existing Radius deploy mechanism to deploy an instance of Terraform, which makes sense, but let's discuss if this could be confusing because it's like a special kind of `rad deploy` which Radius is able to find and integrate with.

````

When the Terraform resource is deployed, Radius:

* Downloads the specified Terraform binary and validates it against the provided checksum
* Installs the Terraform binary in the appropriate location within the Radius control plane
* Performs a `terraform init` and reports any output to the platform engineer

> [!NOTE]
>

> > This feature specification diffs from the initial implementation which took properties on the `rad install` command. 

Reviewer 2: +1 great improvement, and then doesn't install terraform for those not using it.

#### Alternatives Considered

We considered extending the `recipeConfig` property of the Environment resource to include the provider mirror. The challenge with this approach is that the `recipeConfig` is on the Environment. As with Recipe Packs, the Environment resource needs to be as slim as possible because there will be hundreds of environments but only one configuration for Terraform.

We also considered installing Terraform during Radius installation. The benefit of the proposed approach here are:

* Enables platform engineers to install Terraform after Radius has been installed
* Enables platform engineers to upgrade Radius without knowing the Terraform installation instructions
* Bundles all Terraform installation and configuration into one user action
* Enables a clear path to future Terraform functionality. In the future, the Terraform resource can be enhanced with the [Terraform backend configuration](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/backend). 

### User Story 6 – Upgrading Terraform

***As a platform engineer, I need to upgrade the version of Terraform used by Radius***

> The platform engineer modifies the already deployed Terraform resource and redeploys the resource. 

Reviewer: We should also think about how we can do the version control.

$ rad deploy terraform.bicep
```

As before, when the Terraform resource is deployed, Radius:

* Downloads the specified Terraform binary and validates it against the provided checksum
* Installs the Terraform binary in the appropriate location within the Radius control plane
* Performs a `terraform init` and reports any output to the platform engineer

### User Story 7 – Uninstall Terraform

***As a platform engineer, I need to remove all Terraform installations from my environment, including Radius***

Terraform is a third-party solution which the platform engineer installs into Radius. Given this, Radius must enable platform engineers to remove Terraform as well.

The platform engineer deletes the Terraform resource.

```bash
$ rad resource delete System.Resources/terraform tf
```

Radius deletes the Terraform binary from the Radius control plane.

## Scenario 3 – Additional offline configurations 

### User Story 8 – Specify trusted certificate authority

***As a platform engineer, I need provide my organization's certificate authority certificate when installing Radius***

The platform engineer installs Radius using the CLI with override for the various settings.

```bash

> rad install kubernetes \

Reviewer 2: I think we should use `rad admin` as well for updating the certs/providing easy rotation functionality.

Reviewer: We don't have `rad admin` as of now, right?

# Offline Installation Feature Spec

[@zachcasper](https://github.com/zachcasper)

## Summary

Many large organizations have mature security practices where all software entering the organization's environment are controlled. Typically all software packages are scanned for security vulnerabilities prior to being stored internally. Access to non-authorized software packages are restricted. 

> Radius must support these organizations' requirements by making it easy to install, configure, and upgrade Radius while offline, or in *air gapped* environments.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Radius must support these organizations' requirements by making it easy to install, configure, and upgrade Radius when not connected to the internet, aka in an "air gapped" environments.
```

### Goals

* Enable platform engineers to install and upgrade Radius while not connected to the internet

> * Enable platform engineers to control what versions of all require software components are installed

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Enable platform engineers to control what versions of all required software components are installed
```

> * Specifically, improve the way Terraform is installed, configured, and upgraded

Reviewer 4: can you be more specific than "improve the way..." so the reader has a sense upfront of where this is headed

* Increase the transparency of what software is required to run Radius

### Non-Goals (out of scope)

> * Enhancing the installation experience in other ways

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Enhancing the Radius installation experience in other ways
```

| 5    | `radius` and `aws` Bicep extensions                          | Downloaded bi `rad-bicep` dynamically from ACR               | No change                                                    | Manually imported into the user's private OCI registry |
| 6    | `manifest-to-bice-extension` NPM package                     | Remote code execution from [npmjs.com](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@radius-project/manifest-to-bicep-extension) | This package will be eliminated and implemented in the Go program | Same                                                   |
| 7    | Terraform binaries                                           | Dynamically installed by Applications RP from [hashicorp.com](https://releases.hashicorp.com/) | Explicitly installed into the Radius control plane by the platform engineer | Same                                                   |

## Scenario 1 – Installing Radius

### User Story 1 – Downloading releases

> ***As a platform engineer, I need to download the Radius release to an environment not connected to the internet***

Reviewer 4: I assume they are downloading to a quarantine area that is connected to the internet then moving files to the air gapped environment

```bash
# Import UCP container image
$ az acr import \
  --name <ACR_REGISTRY_NAME> 
  --source ghcr.io/radius-project/ucpd:0.48
  --image ucpd:0.48
# Import Controller container image
$ az acr import ...
# Import Applications RP container image
$ az acr import ...
# Import Dynamic RP container image
$ az acr import ...
# Import Bicep container image
$ az acr import ...
# Import Dashboard container image
$ az acr import ...
```

**Radius and AWS Bicep extensions**

The platform engineer or security engineer imports the Radius Bicep extensions into their OCI registry. 

```bash
# Import Radius Bicep extension
$ az acr import \
  --name <ACR_REGISTRY_NAME> 
  --source biceptypes.azurecr.io/radius:0.48
  --image radius:0.48
# Import AWS Bicep extension (optionally)
$ az acr import \
  --name <ACR_REGISTRY_NAME>
  --source biceptypes.azurecr.io/aws:0.48
  --image aws:0.48
```

### User Story 2 – Install CLI

***As a platform engineer or developer, I need to install the Radius CLI***

The platform engineer or developer runs the installation script with additional parameters.

```bash

> $ install.sh \

Reviewer 5: are all these additional parameters going to be optional? what do they default to if so?

Author: They're optional. There is no default value. It's left unspecified.

```

> [!NOTE]
>
>  `rad init` will not support offline installations.

The `image.repository` is the private OCI registry where the Radius container images were stored in the previous step.

The `--skip-contour-install` does not install Contour. Therefore the Gateway resource types will not function until extensibility is implemented.

> [!CAUTION]
>
> `--skip-contour-install` is expected to be removed from Radius in the near future as part of the compute extensibility work. The design for the Gateway recipe no longer uses Contour and Contour is no longer installed by default.

If a Helm mirror has not been configured via `helm repo add`, the `--chart` argument can be used.

```bash
rad install kubernetes \
  --chart <PATH_TO_RADIUS_HELM_CHART_FROM_HELM_PULL> \
  ...
```

### User Story 4 – Install Radius via Helm

***As a platform engineer, I need to install Radius using Helm***

The platform engineer installs Radius using Helm with similar settings.

```bash
helm upgrade radius radius/radius \
  --install \
  --create-namespace 
  --namespace radius-system \
  --version 0.48.0 \
  --wait --timeout 15m0s \
  --set image.repository=<OCI_REGISTRY_URL>/<REPOSITORY>
```

> 

Reviewer 5: Can you add specific user stories for the upgrade scenarios? Since the upgrade process includes other workflows (e.g. preflight checks, etc.) it would be good to have those details.

## Scenario 2 – Managing Terraform

### User Story 5 – Install Terraform

***As a platform engineer, I need to install and configure Terraform for Radius to use***

> The platform engineer deploys a Terraform resource. The Terraform resource replaced the `recipeConfig` properties in the Environment today and adds all other [terraformrc configuration options](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/cli/config/config-file).

Reviewer 5: Some context on how Terraform is installed and configured today in Radius would be helpful

> The platform engineer deploys a Terraform resource. The Terraform resource replaced the `recipeConfig` properties in the Environment today and adds all other [terraformrc configuration options](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/cli/config/config-file).

Reviewer 4: Is it "...deploys a Terraform resource." or "deploys Terraform"... i.e. are they deploying individual resources or TF all-up?

* Downloads the specified Terraform binary and validates it against the provided checksum
* Installs the Terraform binary in the appropriate location within the Radius control plane
* Performs a `terraform init` and reports any output to the platform engineer

> [!NOTE]
>
> This feature specification diffs from the initial implementation which took properties on the `rad install` command. 

The Environment resource no longer has a recipeConfig. This includes:

| As-Is Resource | As-Is Property                          | To-Be Resource | To-Be Property            |
| -------------- | --------------------------------------- | -------------- | ------------------------- |
| Environment    | `recipeConfig.terraform.authentication` | Terraform      | `terraformrc.credentials` |
| Environment    | `recipeConfig.terraform.providers`      | Terraform      | TODO                      |

> [!CAUTION]
>
> **TODO**: Add details on how to handle `recipeConfig.terraform.providers`. This property is used to pass credentials to other providers such as AzureDevOps. Radius only passes credentials to Azure, AWS, and Kubernetes Terraform providers.

#### Alternatives Considered

> We considered extending the `recipeConfig` property of the Environment resource to include the provider mirror. The challenge with this approach is that the `recipeConfig` is on the Environment. As with Recipe Packs, the Environment resource needs to be as slim as possible because there will be hundreds of environments but only one configuration for Terraform.

Reviewer 5: Another option would be to encapsulate the `recipeConfig` into a [`.bicepparam`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-resource-manager/bicep/parameter-files?tabs=Bicep) file that can be reused across the Environments.

```bash
$ rad group create terraform-config
creating resource group "terraform-config" in workspace "kind"...

resource group "terraform-config" created
$ rad deploy terraformGitSecret.bicep --group terraform-config
```

Finally, the platform engineer updates the Terraform configuration.

```bash
$ rad terraform update \
    --git-pat 'github.com: {secret: terraformGitSecret}'
The Terraform configuration has been updated
```

**Passing Radius Secrets to Terraform providers**

To pass a Secret to a Terraform provider, the platform engineer first creates a Bicep file with a Secret resource.

**`azureDevOpsProviderSecret.bicep`**

```yaml
resource azureDevOpsProviderSecret 'Applications.Core/secretStores@2023-10-01-preview' = {
  name: 'azureDevOpsProviderSecret'
  properties: {
    type: 'generic'
    data: {
      pat: {
        value: <PAT> 
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Then deploys the secret in a resource group.

```bash
$ rad deploy terraformGitSecret.bicep --group terraform-config
```

Finally, the platform engineer updates the Terraform configuration.

```bash
$ rad terraform update \
    --providers 'azuredevops: {personal_access_token: azureDevOpsProviderSecret}

> The Terraform configuration has been updated

Reviewer 6: trying to follow : this configuration has been set at the group level. there can be multiple envs in a group. recipes are set at env levels and can have different config requirements. is the idea to have a 1:1 for group:env ?

```

### User Story 7 – Offline Terraform Installation and Configuration

***As a platform engineer, I need to install configure Terraform in my offline environment***

Since the offline installation is more complex and takes many parameters, a Terraform resource type is used. The Terraform resource replaces the `recipeConfig` properties in the Environment today and adds other [terraformrc configuration options](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/cli/config/config-file).

**`terraform.bicep`**

```yaml
param token string

> resource terraform 'System.Resources/terraform@2025-08-01-preview' = {

Reviewer 6: woah! conceptually is it a resource? it could be deployed with multiple instances..
